In this lecture, you'll learn about why we have etherchannel and we'll start off by having a very
quick review of the campus design model again.
So our end host like our PCs get plugged into our access
layer switches. Our access layer switches uplink to the distribution layer switches, and then they
uplink to the core layer switches.
End hosts do not constantly send traffic onto the network.
Most of the time their network connection is sitting idle.
If you think about what you're doing when you're sitting on a PC, if you're working on a wWrd document
or an Excel spreadsheet or something like that, there's no traffic actually going over the network.
Because of this, you can connect on less uplinks to each higher layer than the number of hosts you have and
still maintain acceptable network performance because you don't need to support all of the possible
bandwidth that your hosts have because we're not all going to be using it at the same time.
But if I go back a slide, you see here we've got our two buildings, we've got four access layer switches
in each building for the example, and let's say that they're 48-port switches and I've got 40 end hosts
plugged into each switch.
So that would be 4x40. 160 hosts in the Main Building, 160 hosts in Building 1 as well.
They're uplinking to a pair of distribution switches in both buildings.
So I've got 160 devices in both buildings, but I don't have 160 uplinks going from the access layer to
the distribution layer.
Also, so I don't have that amount of uplinks going from the distribution layer up to the core layer.
I don't need to put that many in because I know that
my PCs are not going to be transmitting at the same time.
They don't actually need that much bandwidth.
A starting rule of thumb recommendation for how much oversubscription you should have in your campus
LAN is 20:1 from the access layer to the distribution layer. Meaning, if you had 20 PCs connected
with 1 Gbps network cards at the access layer, you would require a single 1G uplink
to the distribution layer to support their traffic.
The recommendation is 4:1 for the distribution to core layer links.
And bear in mind that those are general values. You should analyze traffic on your network to verify
that your links are not congested because it depends on particular traffic patterns in your network,
what applications you're running, etc.,
what will be a good oversubscription ratio for you.
These are good ballpark figures.
Switches often have dedicated uplink ports which have got higher bandwidth than the bandwidth on their
access ports. For example, a 48-port 1Gbps switch with a pair of 10Gbps uplinks, and
that can help with the subscription ratio.
For example, if you've got 48x1Gbps clients plugged in that switch, then the total bandwidth
possible would be 48 Gbps.
You've got your 2x10Gbps uplinks, about 20Gbps on your uplink links, so that gives a subscription
ratio of 2.4:1.
If we didn't have those 10Gbps uplinks, if uplinks were also 1Gbps as well, the subscription ratio
would be 24:1.
Obviously not as good.
So normally when you do have switches which have got higher bandwidth uplinks, then oversubscription
is not going to be a problem.
However, we do have a problem when we want to connect 2 uplinks and that problem is spanning-tree. Because
spanning-tree, it provides redundancy, but it does not provide load balancing. Spanning-tree always
selects the one best path to avoid loops.
So if a switch has got multiple equal cost paths, they obviously never switch towards the root bridge.
It will select one of those ports, the one which has got the lowest Port ID.
It is not going to load balance across all of them.
So in our example here with the diagram, we've got uplinks from our access layer Access1 switch going
to the Dist1 switch, and we've got two 10Gbps Ethernet interfaces, 0/1 and 0/2.
0/1 will be selected as the root port as it got the lowest Port ID and T0/2 is blocking.
So even though we physically connected two 10Gbps Ethernet uplinks, we only get 10Gbps worth of
uplink bandwidth.
Not the 20Gbps, because spanning-tree is going to block one of those links.
So that's the problem, we don't get all of our available, physically connected uplink bandwidth.
The solution is etherchannel. Etherchannel groups multiple physical interfaces into a single logical
interface. And spanning-tree
then sees that etherchannel as a single interface so it doesn't block any ports.
We now get the full 20Gbps worth of bandwidth.
So if you look back on the previous slide, when we weren't using etherchannel, spanning-tree sees that
as a possible loop because traffic could go up T0/1 and then back down to T0/2,
and then back up to T0/1 again.
We've got a potential loop there when we don't have etherchannel. But when we do configure etherchannel,
for spanning-tree, it counts as a single link, as a single interface on both sides. So spanning-tree
does not see it as a potential loop.
And now we get the full 20Gbps worth of bandwidth.
Traffic will be load balanced across all the links that are in the etherchannel.
So traffic from my PCs going upstream is going to be load balanced across all the links. The same
for the traffic coming back down in the other direction,
it doesn't just provide load balancing, it provides redundancy as well. If an interface goes down, its traffic
will fail over to the remaining links.
So that was etherchannel on our switches.
We can do basically the same thing on our servers as well with NIC Teaming.
So going back a slide, etherchannel is where we can bundle multiple physical ports into a single logical
port on our inter-switch links. On our servers,
with NIC Teaming, we can bundle multiple physical network cards into a single logical interface. Benefit
we get from this is we get the load balancing and the redundancy again.
And because the operating system sees as a single interface, we just have one IP address on there which
makes things much more convenient and simple to configure.
I'm putting this information in here as well because I wanted to explain the terminology to you and
let you know that there are several different names for what's basically the same thing.
Etherchannel on our switches is also known as a port channel.
In fact, when you hear me talking about it during the section, you'll probably hear me call it port
channel more of an etherchannel.
People in the industry, we tend to call it that more often.
It can also be known as a LAG which stands for link aggregation or a link bundle.
When we bundle our physical interfaces on our servers, we'll usually call it NIC Teaming.
It can also be called bonding, NIC balancing and again, link aggregation.
OK, so that was why we have etherchannel.
It gets us past that problem with spanning-tree.
And also a quick overview of the terminology as well.
See you in the next lecture.